---
title: 'Opinion paralysis as a social phenomenon'
---
<!--- -*- eval: (auto-fill-mode); -*- -->

## Hello

It has been a while since this space saw an update.  This is partly
because life has a habit of sweeping one along, and partly because of
another phenomenon, which i will try to tease out a little bit.
Suffice to say i'm still alive and probably not providing a net
benefit to the globe.

## The topic

If someone were to ask me, i would probably say that i'm quite an
opinionated person.  However, at the same time, by nature i am
extremely confrontation-averse, and i have the impression that the
more time progresses, the less likely i am to publicly take a stance
if i think it may cause offence or be misaligned with whatever my
audience happens to be[^1] (one can imagine that the more unknown
and/or diverse the audience, the trickier it becomes: it follows that
a medium such as this one where whatever one says is both permanently
recorded and globally accessible has a chilling effect, to say the
least – wouldn't want those hypothetical grandchildren to read this
now would we).  This could lead to the perception that i am not, in
fact, opinionated.

Perhaps, and here i am being extremely charitable to myself (a
dangerous pastime, usually), this is on account of awareness and
empathy for a broader range of human experiences than i had at some
undefined previous time.  However, it might also simply be for fear of
causing socially awkward situations or being shown up to be "wrong",
whatever that may mean.  Saving face, basically.  This is, i believe,
a rather cowardly position to take.  In particular, if nobody put
themselves out there and took a stance on a subject, it is unclear how
discourse of any kind would advance.  (Assuming, of course, that this
currently happens at all.  One can only wonder.)

Often, on topics i care quite deeply about, i will be reticent to take
on a particular stance, especially if the discussion is of a political
nature (in the broadest possible sense: this includes government but
also intersectional feminism).  Partly because in spite of my best
efforts i remain AMAB/white, which makes me think there are probably
already enough of us whining and opining (what is really the
difference, i hear you ask) about Things In General that i feel the
world wouldn't necessarily be a richer place for my voice in the fray.
But also because i am afraid of being on the wrong side of whatever
debate: hindsight has a nasty way of showing up even some of the most
best-intentioned people to be bigots.[^2] Practising science, i found
this to be less difficult: ideally, one would float an idea, do the
legwork to see if it held water, and if not then at the very least all
involved had learned a lesson.  Somehow, outside of the arena of
testable/truths, it all becomes a lot more loaded, fraught.
Reputations are risked and relationships strained.  As if by being
ignorant, one can somehow be cast off as a lost cause.



One needs to pick apart why, if at all, we should decide to behave one
way or another, whether openly stating one's opinions and risking
being inflammatory, or on the other hand being extremely circumspect
in all situations and risking seeming anodyne, even if one perhaps has
an extremely lively and engaged inner life (which, if we continue to
be charitable to our struggling author, is presumably the case).
There seems to be no normative reason why one approach or the other
should be preferable; it seems to hinge on whether one seeks
confrontation (of dubious merit) and the opportunity for a
constructive discussion (the bright side) with someone who holds a
differing opinion (which might lead to the edification of both, if
undertaken respectfully) or on the other hand prefers to calmly listen
to the opinions around them and ruminate in private, forming their
opinions in their own time and space (which assumes, of course, that
one even worries about these things: perhaps people do, in fact, exist
who just have and hold and discard their opinions, publicly or not,
without caring much what others think of them and who they potentially
offend).  I certainly gravitate toward the latter.

It is time to admit that this is, unfortunately, a privileged position
to take.  One does not always have the luxury of hearing a diverse –
and potentially offensive – range of opinions, without calling out
perceived injustice.[^3] In such cases i would not argue for
non-confrontational ruminating, but hopefully these are corner cases
in the space of social interactions one has on a day-to-day basis
(another privileged assumption).

## In which i rationalise

If anything, i rail against the perception that someone who isn't
excessively brash or forward with their opinions should be conflated
with someone who is somehow without opinions, or (shock!  horror!  the
embarrassment!)  intellectually lazy.  Lacking in courage, perhaps
yes; but even that i question.  If it is true that the more we learn,
the more we come to understand that we know nothing, what accusation
can we then level against someone who is open to listen to the ideas
and opinions of others, through which they then filter their own
world-view?  Of course, if one is acting in bad faith and simply
nodding while secretly judging their interlocutor, some accusations
can probably be levelled.  However, that example violates the
presupposition that our hypothetical listener will actually make an
honest effort to compare the world-view as explained to them with
their own, think about similarities and differences, and potentially
update and enrich their understanding of the world accordingly.

I don't know if i'd go so far as to unequivocally hail
non-confrontational observers as exemplary, but at the very least i do
believe there is a place for them in this world of loud talkers.  How
they should subsequently engender positive change in the world is
another discussion entirely, but presumably it is impossible for
everyone to be a leader simultaneously.  Perhaps a fertile subject for
a future rant.

## Exeunt

This rambling should not be taken as anything other than a
disgustingly indulgent public musing on learning to accept my own
non-confrontational nature in the face of perceived social pressure to
"have an opinion" and "be interesting".  It is, appropriately, a bit
of an exercise in throwing stuff out there and trying not to worry too
hard about what people might think.  Presumably, people that care
enough would take the trouble to enunciate why they take offence at
what i do or say (comments welcome!  Email me!), and explain how i
might in future do better.  The friends i know and care about
certainly would, which is why they are dear to me.

Have a nice day, everyone.



[^1]: Within reason, of course.  I would not agree with an overtly
    racist statement someone might make, for example.  Exactly how to
    proceed is of course a difficult question.  Ethics dictate that
    the statement should be called out, although i would probably
    avoid a polarising personal attack in the hope that by asking
    questions and pointing out where i disagree i might perhaps nudge
    the statement-maker towards more a more inclusive/egalitarian
    world-view.  This is likely a good moment to check my privilege as
    someone not belonging to a marginalised group.  Hopefully it is
    acceptable to use that privilege to enter into aforementioned
    discussion.

[^2]: Viskontas, Indre and Mooney, Chris (2014, May). The Science of
    Your Racist Brain. _Mother
    Jones_,
    [online](http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2014/05/inquiring-minds-david-amodio-your-brain-on-racism).

[^3]: Newkirk, Vann R., II (2016, December). Sometimes There Are More
    Important Goals Than Civility. _The
    Atlantic_,
    [online](https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/discussing-racism-white-voters/509528/).
